Music Blocks “Music is a hidden arithmetic exercise of the soul, which does not know that it is counting.” — Leibniz
Music Blocks4 (musicblocks.sugarlabs.org) is a visual programming language and collection of manipulative tools for exploring musical and mathematical concepts in an integrative and fun way. Music Blocks is a fork of Turtle Blocks,5 an activity with a Logo-inspired graphical turtle that draws colorful art based on snap-together visual programming elements. Its low floor provides an easy entry point for beginners. It also has high ceiling programming, graphics, mathematics, and computer science features that will challenge the more adventurous student. Music is not an add-on to the Music Blocks language; the note is a core datatype in the language. The note expresses a quanta of time as a ratio, because the relative length of a note and their relationship to other notes is the fundamental basis of rhythm. From there, Music Blocks has various ways to express pitch: solfege (e.g., do, re, mi), musical alphabet (e.g., C, D, E), and Hertz (e.g., 440Hz for A in an equal temperament tuning system), which are pedagogically important expressions of pitch for making music. Music Blocks is designed to leverage the tools of the trade by using well-established scaffolding in music instruction and building analogous tools (or widgets) to help shape the introduction of powerful ideas, such as polyphonic rhythms, key and mode, intervals, tuning, and temperament. The software widgets are also tied to concepts in computer science. In other words, the widgets don’t just produce music, they output code that is descriptive of concepts found in music, such as generating rhythms, changing tempo, and using samples.

Some things to do with Music Blocks :-> Animate polyrhythms, Broadcast conductor instructions, Program a canon, Explore circles of fifths, Program a circular rhythm maker, Use conditionals in music, Explore representations, Musical cookie hunt, Design a crazy keyboard etc.

Lilypond is a music engraving program. The Save as Lilypond option in Music Blocks exports a Music Blocks composition into sheet music, thus connecting traditional musical notation with the block language.